### *Debaryomyces hansenii*

**Nobre, A., Lucas, C., Leão, C. 1999. Transport and Utilization of Hexoses and Pentoses in the Halotolerant Yeast *Debaryomyces hansenii*. Applied and Enviromental Microbiology 65, 8:3594-3598.**

*D. hansenii* is a xylose-utilizing yeast that exhibits an industrially interesting xylitol/ethanol production ratio. The ethanol productivity of several related yeast species cannot be compared to *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* when glucose based substrates are used.

**Prista, C., Loureiro-Dias, M.C., Montiel, V., García, R., Ramos, J. 2005. Mechanisms underlying the halotolerant way of *Debaryomyces hansenii*. FEMS Yeast Research, 5: 693-701.**

*Debaryomyces hansenii* is commonly found in rather alkaline salty shallow waters and in brines and salted food. It is the yeast most frequently found in traditional cheeses and sausages, with recognized contribution to special flavours in these products. It is an ascomycetous yeast (anamorph of *Candida famata*), phylogenetically related to *Candida albicans*, and the closest to yeasts formally classified as *Schwanniomyces*. The presence of *D. hansenii* in all those enviroments is explained by its unusual ability to grow in the presence of high concentrations of NaCl. For  that it has been designated as halotoleran microorganism. To overcome the toxicity of sodioum and exhibit a good performance under high salt concentrations, most microorganisms use the strategy of keeping the intracellular concentration of sodium low ("Sodium excluders"). A few, in particular some *Halobacteria*, require high intracellular concentrations of sodium for normal enzymatic activities ("Sodium includers"). Although mechanisms of sodium extrusion are present in *D. hansenii*, several autors have reported unusual high intracellular salt concentrations in this yeast. Even some plasmids from *D. hansenii* require sodium for their stability, in agreement with the experimental evidence that this yeast withstands high levels of intracellular sodium. From this point of view *D. hansenii* may be considered as a sodium includer yeast to a certain extent: still an important role is reserved for the production and intracellular retention of compatible solutes, glycerol in particular. (That is why sequenced by Génolevures). It is capable of accumulating sodium without being intoxicated even when potassium is present at low concentration in the enviroment. In addition, sodium improves frowth and protects *D. hansenii* in the presence of additional stress factors such as high temperature and extreme pH. An array of advantageous factors, as compared with *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*, is putatively involved in the increased halotolerance of *D. hansenii*: glycerol, the main compatible solute, is kept inside the cell by an active glycerol-Na+ symporter; potassium uptake is no inhibited by sodium; sodium protein targets in *D. hansenii* seem to be more resistant.  

**Arroyo González, N., Vázquez, A., Ortiz Zuazaga, H.G., Sen, A., Luna Olvera, H., Peña de Ortiz, S., Govind, N.S. 2009. Genome-wide expression profiling of the osmoadaptation response of *Debaryomyces hansenii*. Yeast, 26: 111-124**

Microarray-based gene expression analyses of the entire genome of *D. hansenii* was used to study its response to osmotic stress. Differential gene expression, compared to control, was examined at three time points (0.5, 3 and 6h) after exposure of *D. hansenii* cultures to high salt concentration. Among the 1.72% of genes showing statistically significant differences in expression, only 65 genes displayed at least three-fold increases in mRNA levels after treatment with 2M NaCl. On the other hand, 44 genes showed three-fold repression. Upregulated as well as downregulated genes were grouped into functional categories to identify biochemical processes possibly affected by osmotic stress and involved in osmoadaptation. The observation that only a limited number of genes are upregulated in *D. hansenii* in response to osmotic stress supports the notion that *D. hansenii* is pre-adapted to survive in extreme saline enviroments. In addition, since more than one-half of the upregulated genes encode for ribosomal proteins, it is possible that a translational gene regulatory mechanism plays a key role in *D. hansenii*'s osmorregulatory response. Validation studies for ENA1 and for hyphal wall/cell elongation protein genes, using real-time PCR, confirmed patterns of gene expression observed in our microarrayexperiments. 

*Chao, H-f., Yen, Y-f., Ku, M.S.B. 2009. Characterization of a salt-induced DhAHP, a gene coding for alkyl hydroperoxide reductase, from the extremely halophilic yeast *Debaryomyces hansenii*. BMC Microbiology, 9: 182.**

By using forward subtractive hybridization we have cloned and sequenced DhAHP from *D. hansenii* that is significantly upregulated during salinity stress. DhAHP is orthologous to the alkly hydroperoxide reductase of the peroxiredoxin gene family, which catalyzes the reduction of peroxides at the expense of thiol compounds. The full-lengthed cDNA of DhAHP has 674 bp of nucleotide and contains a 516 bp open reading frame (ORF) encoding a deduced protein of 172 amino acid residues (18.3 kDa). *D. hansenii* Ahp is a cytosolic protein that belongs to the Ahp of the 1-Cys type peroxiredoxins. Phylogentically, the DhAhp and *Candida albicans* Ahp11 (Swiss-Prot: Q5AF44) share a common ancestry but show divergent evolution. Silence of its expression in *D. hansenii* by RNAi resulted in decreased tolerance to salt whereas overexpression of DhAHP in *D. hansenii* and the salt-sensitive yeasts *Saccharomyces cereviasiae* and *Pichia methanolica* conferred a higher tolerance with a reduced level of reactive oxygen species. In conclusion, for the first time our study has identified alkly hydroperoxide reductase as a key protein involved in the salt tolerance of the extremely halophilic *D. hansenii*. Apparently, this enzyme plays a multi-functional role in the yeast's adaptation to salinity; it serves as a peroxidase in scavenging reactive oxygen species, as a molecular chaperone in protecting essential proteins from denaturation, and as a redox sensor in regulating H2O2-mediated cell defense signaling. 

**Dujon, B., Sherman, D., Fischer, G., Durrens, P., Casaregola, S., Lafontaine, I., Montigny, J., Marck, C., Neuvéglise, C., Talla, E., Goffard, N., Frangeul, L., Aigle, M., Anthouard, V., Babour, A., Barbe, V., Barnay, S., Blanchin, S., Jean-Marie Beckerich, Beyne, E., Bleykasten, C., Boisramé, A., Boyer, J., Cattolico, L., Confanioleri, F., Daruvar, A., Despons, L., Fabre, E., Fairhead, C., Ferry-Dumazet, H., Groppi, A., Hantraye, F., Hennequin, C., Jauniaux, N., Joyet, P., Kachouri, R., Kerrest, A., Kozul, R., Lemaire, M., Lesur, I., Ma, L., Muller, H., Nicaud, J-M., Nikolski, M., Oztas, S., Ozier-Kalogeropoulos, O., Pellenz, S., Potier, S., Richard, G-F., Straub, M-L., Suleau, A., Swennen, D., Tekaia, F., Wésolowski-Louvel, M., Westhof, E., Wirth, B., Zeniou-Meyer, Maria., Zivanovic, I., Bolotin-Fukuhara, M., Thierry, A., Bouchier, C., Caudron, B., Scarpelli, C., Gaillardin, C., Weissenbach, J., Wincker, P., Souciet, J-L. 2004. Genome evolution in yeasts. Nature, 430: 35-44.**

Genome reference CBS767. 
- Number of chromosomes: 7
- Total reads: 150570
- Sequence coverage: x 9.7
- Clone coverage: x 36
- N50 contigs: 102
- N50 scaffolds: 2038
- Total gaps: 207
- Assembly size (without rDNA): 12221 Kb
- Genome size: 12.2 Mb
- Average G+C content: 36.3 %
- Total CDS: 6906
- Total tRNA genes: 205
- Average gene density: 79.2 %
- Average G+C in CDS: 37.5 %
- Average CDS size: 389 codons
- Median CDS size: 307 codons
- Maximum CDS size: 4190 codons

**Kumar, S., Randhawa, A., Ganesan, K., Raghava, G.P.S., Mondal, A.K. 2012. Draft Genome Sequence of Salt-Tolerant Yeast *Debaryomyces hansenii* var. *hansenii* MTCC 234. American Society for Microbiology 11, 7: 961-962**

MTCC 234 more halotolerant than CBS 767 and produces riboflavin and arabitol. A total of 29,714,918 single-end reads with a length of 72 nucleotides were generated with a genome coverage of 175-fold.542 contigs with a N50 contig length of 68,507 bp. 35.42 % G+C, encodes 69 tRNA and 3 rRNA. 5313 proteins predicted.

**Groenewald, M., Daniel, H.M., Robert, V., Poot, G.A., Smith, M.Th. 2008. Polyphasic re-examination of *Debaryomyces hansenii* strains and reinstatement of *D. hansenii*, *D. fabryi* and *D. subglobosus*.**

The type species of the genus *Debaryomyces*, *Debaryomyces hansenii*, is a highly heterogeneous species. It has been isolated from a large diversity of natural sources including fruit, air, water, soil, but most frequently from processed food products. The species delineation of this yeast species urgently needs clarification. The heterogeneity in taxonomic characteristics has resulted in the description of varieties linked to *D. hansenii*. The aim of this study was to re-examine and classify *D. hansenii* using a polyphasic approach. A total of 65 *D. hansenii* isolates were examined, 57 representing the variety *hansenii* and nine the variety *fabryi*. The selection of strains for DNA reassociation and phylogenetic analysis was based on polymerase chain reaction mediated fingerprints using four mini- and microsatellite-specific primers. The discriminating power of growth at 35°C and 37°C was re-examined and ascospore production was observed. DNA reassociations and phylogenetic analyses were performed on selected isolates from each of the clusters obtained from the DNA fingerprint analyses. The data indicated the presence of three distinct species within the *D. hansenii* group, which were represented by type strains of former species and that are proposed to be reinstated: *D. hansenii* (CBS 767 = MUCL 49680), *D. fabryi* (CBS 789 = MUCL 49731) and *D. subglobosus* (CBS 792 = MUCL 49732).

**Desnos-Ollivier, M., Ragon, M., Robert, V., Raoux, D., Gantier, J-C., Dromer, F. 2008. *Debaryomyces hansenii* (*Candida famata*), a rare human fungal pathogen often missidentified as *Picchia guilliermondii* (*Candida guilliermondii*). Journal of Clinical Microbiology 46, 10: 3237-3242.**

*Debaryomyces hansenii* is a hemiascomycetous yeast commonly found in natural substrates and in various types of cheese. *Pichia guilliermondii* is widely distributed in nature and is a common constituent of the normal human microflora. Both species have been described in human infections but are extremely difficult to differentiate phenotypically. Thus, frequent errors in identification occur. The 62 clinical and environmental isolates sent between 2000 and 2007 to the French National Reference Center for Mycoses and Antifungals as *D. hansenii* or *P. guilliermondii* were analyzed by using the carbon assimilation pattern, the presence of pseudohyphae, and sequencing of the ITS and D1/D2 regions of the rRNA gene. The objective of this study was to assess using nucleotide sequences whether phenotypic identification was accurate and whether phenotypic characteristics could be used to differentiate the two species when sequencing was not available. We found that 58% of the isolates were misidentified and belong to seven different species: *P. guilliermondii*, *P. caribbica*, *P. jadinii*, *D. hansenii*, *Candida palmioleophila*, *C. haemulonii* type II, and *Clavispora lusitaniae*. In conclusion, *D. hansenii* may not be as common a human pathogen as previously thought. Sequencing of either ITS or D1/D2 regions is a good tool for differentiating the species more frequently confused with *D. hansenii*, keeping in mind that reliable databases should be used.

**Jacques, N., Sacerdot, C., Derkaoui, M., Dujon, B., Ozier-Kalogeropoulos, O., Casaregola, S. 2010. Population polymorphism of Nuclear Mitochondrial DNA Inserions reveals widespread diploidy associated with loss of heterozygosity in *Debaryomyces hansenii*. Eukariotic Cell 9, 3: 449-459.**

*Debaryomyces hansenii*, a yeast that participates in the elaboration of foodstuff, displays important genetic diversity. Our recent phylogenetic classification of this species led to the subdivision of the species into three distinct clades. *D. hansenii* harbors the highest number of nuclear mitochondrial DNA (NUMT) insertions known so far for hemiascomycetous yeasts. Here we assessed the intraspecific variability of the NUMTs in this species by testing their presence/absence first in 28 strains, with 21 loci previously detected in the completely sequenced strain CBS 767, and second in a larger panel of 77 strains, with 8 most informative loci. We were able for the first time to structure populations in *D. hansenii*, although we observed little NUMT insertion variability within the clades. We determined the chronology of the NUMT insertions, which turned out to correlate with the previously defined taxonomy and provided additional evidence that colonization of nuclear genomes by mitochondrial DNA is a dynamic process in yeast. In combination with flow cytometry experiments, the NUMT analysis revealed the existence of both haploid and diploid strains, the latter being heterozygous and resulting from at least four crosses among strains from the various clades. As in the diploid pathogen *Candida albicans*, to which *D. hansenii* is phylogenetically related, we observed a differential loss of heterozygosity in the diploid strains, which can explain some of the large genetic diversity found in *D. hansenii* over the years.
 
**Mota, A.J., Back-Brito, G.N., Nobrega, F.G. 2012. Molecular identification of *Pichia guilliermondii*, *Debaryomyces hansenii* and *Candida palmioleophila*. Genetics and Molecular Biology 35, 1: 122-125.**

Traditional phenotypic methods and commercial kits based on carbohydrate assimilation patterns are unable to consistently distinguish among isolates of *Pichia guilliermondii*, *Debaryomyces hansenii* and *Candida palmioleophila*. As result, these species are often misidentified. In this work, we established a reliable method for the identification/differentiation of these species. Our assay was validated by DNA sequencing of the polymorphic region used in a real-time PCR assay driven by species-specific probes targeted to the fungal ITS 1 region. This assay provides a new tool for pathogen identification and for epidemiological, drug resistance and virulence studies of these organisms.

